Mixture Reduction Algorithms
for Point and Extended Object
Tracking in Clutter
D. J. SALMOND
Defence Science and Technology Laboratory
UK
The Bayesian solution to the problem of tracking a target
with measurement association uncertainty gives rise to mixture
distributions, which are composed of an ever increasing number
of components. To produce a practical tracking filter, the growth
of components must be controlled by approximating the mixture
distribution. Two mixture reduction schemes (a joining algorithm
and a clustering algorithm) have been derived for this purpose.
If significant well spaced mixture components are present,
these techniques can provide a useful improvement over the
probabilistic data association filter (PDAF) approach, which
reduces the mixture to a single Gaussian component at each
time step. For the standard problem of tracking a point target in
uniform random clutter, a Monte Carlo simulation study has been
employed to identify the region of the problem parameter space
where significant performance improvement is obtained over the
PDAF.
In the second part of this paper, the formal Bayesian filter
is derived for an extended target consisting of an array of
measurement sources with association uncertainty. A practical
multiple hypothesis filter is implemented using mixture reduction
and simulation results are presented.
Manuscript received May 27, 2007; revised October 26, 2007;
released for publication January 25, 2008.
IEEE Log No. T-AES/45/2/933013.
Refereeing of this contribution was handled by P. Willett.
This work is published with the permission of the Defence Science
and Technology Laboratory on behalf of the Controller of HMSO.
Author’s address: Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, A2
Building, Ively Road, Farnborough, Hants GU14 0LX, UK, E-mail:
(djsalmond@gmail.com).
0018-9251/09/$25.00 °c 2009 British Crown Copyright
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper is a revision and extension of a
conference publication [1] from 1990 on mixture
reduction methods for target tracking with
measurement association uncertainty. In that paper two
schemes were proposed for reducing the number of
components in a Gaussian mixture without modifying
some measure of the mixture structure beyond
acceptable limits. These methods were applied to
the classical problem of tracking a single target in
random, uniformly distributed clutter. Performance
was compared with the probabilistic data association
filter (PDAF) [2] for a point target moving on a plane
with a near constant velocity dynamics model and
Cartesian measurements. More recently, we have
employed the reduction method to control hypothesis
growth for a number of other tracking problems
including extended object and group tracking [3]. In
this paper, the contribution of the original conference
publication [1] is included and these applications are
summarised. We also briefly review modifications,
improvements and shortcomings of the original
mixture reduction algorithms that have been pointed
out by a number of authors in the last few years.
This work was motivated by the problem of
tracking a target in random clutter, when the origin of
sensor measurements is uncertain. The full Bayesian
solution to this problem [2, 4] gives rise to mixture
distributions for the required target state vector of the
form
p(x)=X
N
i=1
¯i
pi
(x) (1)
where x is the state vector of the target (or target
group), N is the number of components in the
mixture, pi
(x) is a component probability density
function (pdf), and ¯i is a probability associated with
the ith component such that ¯i > 0 and PN
i=1 ¯i = 1.
Each component of the mixture corresponds to a
feasible measurement association history. ¯i is the
probability that the ith measurement history is correct.
If the equation of motion of the target (or target
group) to be tracked is linear with Gaussian driving
noise, and measurements originating from the target
are linearly related to the state vector but corrupted by
Gaussian measurement noise, then each of the mixture
components is a Gaussian pdf. In this case the pdf (1)
is a Gaussian mixture, and the mean and covariance
of each component may be obtained from a Kalman
filter.
While uncertainty persists, the number of feasible
hypotheses on the origin of measurements grows, as
does the number N of mixture components. Since
every component must be propagated at each time
step, to implement a practical tracking filter it is
essential to control the growth in the number of
components by approximating the mixture. The
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 45, NO. 2 APRIL 2009 667
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
PDAF [2] is a popular and economical approximation
which reduces the complete mixture to a single
Gaussian component after processing each set of
measurements. However this may destroy valuable
information, especially if significant well-spaced
components are present. Thus it may be useful to
consider approximations which allow the retention
of more than one component.
In Section II we describe the development
of two mixture reduction schemes known as the
joining algorithm and the clustering algorithm.
The performance of these methods is assessed in
Section III for the problem of tracking a point target
in uniform random clutter. Multiple hypothesis filters
employing the reduction schemes are compared with
the PDAF over the problem parameter space. Recent
developments by other authors are briefly reviewed
in Section IV. An application of the clustering
algorithm to an extended object tracking example [3]
is presented in Section V.
II. DEVELOPMENT OF MIXTURE REDUCTION
ALGORITHMS
A. Requirements
The following criteria have been selected for the
design of an algorithm for approximating Gaussian
mixtures.
1) The approximation should result in another
Gaussian mixture. This allows the tracking filter to
be implemented as a bank of Kalman filters, extended
Kalman filters (EKFs), or unscented Kalman filters
(UKFs).
2) The algorithm should allow an upper limit on
the number NT of components after approximation to
be specified.
3) If possible, reduction should be achieved
without modifying the “structure” of the distribution
beyond some acceptable limit. Conversely, to avoid
retaining unnecessary components, reduction should
continue until this limit is reached, so that the
approximation may contain less than NT components.
4) The approximation should preserve the mean
and covariance of the original mixture. The PDAF
approximation is also based on this requirement.
5) The algorithm should be computationally
efficient (reduction must be accomplished within the
filter update period), even when the original mixture
consists of a large number of components, each with a
different covariance matrix.
The mixture reduction algorithms described
below may be viewed as developments of the direct
approximation methods of Alspach [5] and Lainiotis
and Park [6]. Several other approaches, most of which
are essentially variations on these methods, are also
reviewed in [4]; also see Section IV. These algorithms
operate by successively merging similar components
so as to meet requirement 3. (Other schemes which
do not directly use a measure of mixture structure
include the N-scan memory of Singer et al. [7].) The
measure of mixture structure used in this development
is derived from a decomposition of the mixture
covariance matrix.
B. Mixture Structure: the Covariance Matrix
The covariance matrix P of any mixture with N
components may be written
P = W + B (2)
where W = PN
i=1 ¯i
Pi
, B = PN
i=1 ¯i
(xˆi ¡ xˆ)(xˆi ¡ xˆ)
T,
xˆ = PN
i=1 ¯i
xˆi is the mean of the distribution, and
xˆi and Pi are, respectively, the mean and covariance
of the ith component of the mixture. Here W and
B are both symmetric matrices, W being positive
definite and B being positive semi-definite. W may
be interpreted as the contribution from the covariance
“within” each component of the mixture, while B may
be interpreted as the between component contribution
(or spread of means) due to the separation between
the mixture components.
Suppose that the mixture distribution is
approximated by merging several components
together. If C is the set of subscripts of components
to be merged, then in order to preserve the mean and
covariance of the mixture, the probability mass ¯0
, the
mean xˆ0
, and the covariance P0 of the new component
should be chosen as
¯0 =X
i2C
¯i
, xˆ0 = (1=¯0
)
X
i2C
¯i
xˆi
P0 = (1=¯0
)
X
i2C
¯i
(Pi + xˆi
xˆT
i ) ¡ xˆ0
xˆ0T:
(3)
Although the overall covariance matrix P is
unchanged, this merging of components results in
a loss of between component covariance B which is
balanced by an increase in W. More precisely, if W† is
the within-component covariance of the approximated
mixture, then the difference L = W† ¡ W is a positive
semi-definite matrix given by
L = ¯0
P0
¡
X
i2C
¯i
Pi =X
i2C
¯i
(xˆi ¡ xˆ0
)(xˆi ¡ xˆ0
)
T:
This shift of covariance from B to W provides a basis
for a measure of the modification of mixture structure
(i.e., a cost function) resulting from the merging of
components.
C. The Joining Algorithm
Ideally the final partition of components into sets
for merging, should be such that the cost function
is minimized. However this could involve a search
668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 45, NO. 2 APRIL 2009
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
through every possible partition which would be far
too time consuming. Instead, a technique, which we
call the joining algorithm, has been developed where
components are merged successively in pairs, so
that the increase in the cost function is minimized
at each iteration of the algorithm. Clearly there is
no guarantee that the final partition from such a
procedure will achieve the smallest possible value of
the cost function.
To implement the joining algorithm using a cost
function based on an increase in the within-component
covariance, a suitable scalar measure is required. If
components i and j are merged, the increase in W is
given by
Lij = ¯i
¯j
¯i + ¯j
(xˆi ¡ xˆ j )(xˆi ¡ xˆ j )
T:
One possible measure is the trace of Lij which is
the squared Euclidean distance between component
means modified by the factor ¯i
¯j=(¯i + ¯j ). However
this has the disadvantage that it is dependent on the
scaling of the elements of the state vector and so is
problem dependent. This difficulty is avoided by using
the Mahalanobis distance to give
d2
ij = ¯i
¯j
¯i + ¯j
(xˆi ¡ xˆ j )
TP¡1(xˆi ¡ xˆ j ) (4)
which is related to Lij by d2
ij = tr(P¡1Lij ) where P
is the overall mixture covariance given by (2). This
measure is invariant under all nonsingular linear
transformations of the state vector. At each iteration
of the joining algorithm, the two components which
are closest in the sense of the distance measure (4)
are combined to form a new component defined by
the relations (3). (Note that d2
ij is loosely referred to a
“distance” although actually it is a squared distance.)
The minimum value of the distance measure
at each iteration is an indicator of the change in
distribution structure resulting from the merging of
the two closest components. Thus if a threshold T
defining the acceptable modification to the distribution
is specified, approximation should proceed until the
minimum distance exceeds this threshold. (It can
be shown [4] that this minimum distance between
components increases monotonically as reduction
proceeds.) In choosing a value for the threshold T,
it is useful to note that the distance d2
ij is bounded:
d2
ij < dim(x). Simulation studies indicate that a value
of T =0:001 dim(x) retains sufficient components to
give, on visual inspection, a good approximation to
the mixture. If d2
ij exceeds T before the number of
components has been reduced below the specified
maximum NT, then approximation continues beyond
the acceptable limit of modification.
To implement the joining algorithm, a symmetric
matrix (d2
ij ) containing the distance between every pair
of components in the original mixture is evaluated.
Fig. 1. Original mixture (24 components).
Fig. 2. Joining algorithm (NT = 8).
Fig. 3. Joining algorithm (NT = 4).
At each iteration, the smallest element of the matrix
is found and the corresponding pair of components
are merged. The distance matrix is then reduced and
updated. The storage requirement for the algorithm is
O(N2), the number of distance evaluations is O(N2),
and the number of comparisons is O(N3), where N is
the number of components in the original mixture.
Figs. 1—3 show an example of mixture reduction
with the joining algorithm for a two-dimensional
distribution.
SALMOND: MIXTURE REDUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR POINT AND EXTENDED OBJECT TRACKING IN CLUTTER 669
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
D. The Clustering Algorithm
With this second method, components are
combined in groups rather than in pairs. Thus
reduction proceeds more rapidly, although more
components may be combined than is necessary to
achieve the limit NT.
This algorithm is based on the proposition that
the mixture components with the largest ¯ weights
carry the most important information. Thus starting
with the largest component, this algorithm gathers in
all surrounding components that are in some sense
close to the principal component. Subsequently the
largest component of the remainder is selected and the
process is repeated until all the components have been
clustered. This is called the clustering algorithm.
The distance measure chosen to represent the
closeness of components to the cluster centre is
defined by
D2
i = ¯i
¯c
¯i + ¯c
(xˆi ¡ xˆc)
TP¡1 c (xˆi ¡ xˆc) (5)
where ¯c, xˆ c, and Pc are the probability mass, mean,
and covariance of the principal component, and ¯i
and xˆi are the probability mass and mean of the ith
component. This is the same as the distance measure
d2
ij of the previous section, except the distance is
normalized to the covariance of the cluster centre
rather than the complete mixture. Any component
i for which D2
i <T1 is selected as a cluster member.
Leaving aside the factor ¯i
¯c(=¯i + ¯c), the clustering
boundary would be a hyper-ellipsoid in the state
space, which is a surface of constant probability
density of the principal component. The factor
¯i
¯c(=¯i + ¯c) biases the distance measure so that
small components are more easily clustered while
large components retain their individuality. The
threshold T1 defines the acceptable modification to
the distribution and it is suggested that to give a good
mixture approximation, T1 should be set to T1 =0:05T0
1
where T0
1 defines the hyper-ellipsoid in state space
which contains only 1% of the probability mass of
the principal component. This choice of threshold is
further discussed in [4].
Each cluster of components (some clusters may
consist of a single component) is approximated by a
single Gaussian defined by (3). After all components
have been clustered, the approximation is complete
if the number of components in the approximation is
below the specified maximum NT. Otherwise further
reduction is necessary. This is achieved by repeating
the clustering procedure on the first approximation,
but with the threshold incremented by ¢T. This
clustering operation is iterated until the necessary
reduction has been effected. The choice of the
increment ¢T is a compromise between the number
Fig. 4. Clustering algorithm (NT = 8).
Fig. 5. Clustering algorithm (NT = 4).
of iterations required and the possibility of clustering
more components than necessary. In this study, the
value of ¢T is fixed: ¢T =0:05¢T0
, where T0
1 + ¢T0
defines the hyper-ellipsoid which contains 6% of the
probability mass of the principal component (see [4]).
However, an override is provided which may increase
the clustering threshold further to ensure that at least
one component is clustered on each iteration.
The computational cost of this algorithm depends
on how many iterations are required to adequately
reduce the mixture. It is most efficient when the
entire approximation is accomplished within a single
iteration, which requires between N and NM distance
evaluations and comparisons, and M matrix inversions
to reduce the mixture from N to M components. In
the worst case when only one component is clustered
on each iteration, the number of distance evaluations
and comparisons is O(N3) and the number of matrix
inversions is O(N2). The algorithm requires minimal
extra storage above that needed to hold the mixture
components.
Figs. 4 and 5 show the result of applying
the clustering algorithm to the mixture shown in
Fig. 1. Note there are visible differences with the
approximations from the joining algorithm. Fig. 6
shows the single Gaussian fit equivalent to the
670 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 45, NO. 2 APRIL 2009
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 6. Single Gaussian fit (PDAF).
PDAF (there is a substantial loss of structure in this
case).
III. PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT FOR A POINT
TARGET IN RANDOM CLUTTER
A. The Tracking Problem
The performance of Bayesian filters employing
the reduction algorithms has been assessed for the
problem of tracking a point target in the presence
of random clutter. The target moves on a 2-D plane
according to a discrete second-order (near constant
velocity) model with time interval ¢t between
measurement frames: xk+1 = ©xk + ¡wk where
x =(x,x_,y,y_)T, w =(wX,wY)
T, © = diagf©C,©Cg,
¡ = diagf¡C,¡Cg,
©C =
μ1 ¢t
01 ¶
and ¡C =
μ¢t2=2
¢t ¶
:
The acceleration process wk is modelled as zero mean,
white Gaussian noise with covariance E[wkwT
k ]= qI2
where I2 is the 2 £ 2 identity matrix. At each time step
the filter receives a set of position measurements, one
of which (the true measurement) originates from the
target and is related to the state vector by the equation
zk =
μ1000
0010¶
xk + vk
where vk is zero mean, white Gaussian measurement
noise with covariance E[vkvT
k ]= rI2, so the detection
probability PD is unity. (This assumption that PD =1
is imposed to avoid introducing a third independent
problem parameter in the performance analysis–see
below.) The clutter measurements, which are
independent of the target, are uniformly distributed
over the sensor surveillance region with density ½
per unit area. It is assumed that at each time step,
the target is well inside this surveillance region and
the identity of the true measurement is unknown
to the tracking filter. This is similar to the problem
considered by Bar-Shalom and Birmiwal [8]; the
equation of motion of the target has been widely
used in tracking problems and is the basis of the ®-¯
filter. If it is further assumed that the initial position
and velocity of the target are perfectly known, then
the problem may be completely described by two
nondimensional parameters:
q¢t4=r and ½r:
(This can be seen by making the substitution x0 =
x=pr, x_0 = x¢t= _ pr, y0 = y=pr, and y_0 = y¢t= _ pr, so
transforming the state vector into a nondimensional
form.) The parameters q¢t4=r and ½r represent the
normalized variance of the target acceleration and the
normalized density of the clutter.
The measure of tracking performance for this
problem is the average time that a filter maintains
track on the target. A track is deemed to be lost if
either of the following criteria are satisfied:
1) the true measurement is rejected by a coarse
acceptance test (see below) for five consecutive time
steps.
2) jxˆk ¡ xkj > 10¾xk or jyˆk ¡ ykj > 10¾yk for five
consecutive time steps, where (xˆk,yˆk) is the filter’s
estimate (the mean of posterior distribution) of the
target position at time step k,(xk,yk) is the actual
target position at time step k, and ¾xk and ¾yk are the
standard deviations of the position estimates of the
equivalent Kalman filter (i.e., the optimal filter for the
same problem but with ½ = 0).
These criteria are testing for consistent rejection
of the true measurement, or for a tracking error which
is consistently large in comparison with the expected
error of the equivalent Kalman filter; consistent being
defined as five time steps and large being defined as
10 standard deviations.
B. Effect of Varying NT
Three filters were implemented for this problem:
the joining algorithm filter (JAF), the clustering
algorithm filter (CAF), and the PDAF. Each of these
filters is based on the Bayesian solution of the above
problem (which is essentially a special case of the
extended object filter presented in Section V). For
each filter the growth of mixture components is
controlled in two stages. First, the measurements
received at each time step are subjected to a coarse
acceptance test (gating) which eliminates any
measurements that are very unlikely to originate
from the target. As is standard practice, an ellipsoidal
gate in observation space centred on the expected
value of the target measurement was employed [9].
The threshold for this test was set to ensure that the
probability of rejecting the true measurement was
less than 0.001. The posterior distribution of the
state vector is based on the accepted measurements.
SALMOND: MIXTURE REDUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR POINT AND EXTENDED OBJECT TRACKING IN CLUTTER 671
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 7. Average track lifetime comparison.
The second stage of control is the mixture reduction
algorithm which is applied before the next set of
measurements is processed. In the case of the PDAF, a
full propagation of all components is unnecessary and
a very efficient filter algorithm may be used [2].
To compare the performance of the filters as a
function of NT, simulations have been carried out
for a single pair of problem parameters: q¢t4=r =1
and ½r =0:012. At this point in the parameter space,
the JAF and CAF outperform the PDAF. For these
parameters, the equivalent Kalman filter (receiving
only true measurements) would rapidly reach steady
state conditions: the standard deviation of the position
error would approach within 1% of its final steady
state value after only four time steps. The expected
number of clutter measurements that would pass the
coarse acceptance test based on steady state Kalman
filter covariances is 2.084.
For the assessment, 100 target trajectories with
associated measurements were generated. The filters
were allowed to continue tracking until one of the
track loss criteria was satisfied. The average track
lifetime NAVE for a constant velocity prediction from
the perfectly known initial state vector (i.e., ignoring
all measurements) is 13.6 time steps. Fig. 7 shows
NAVE (from the 100 trials) as a function for NT for the
CAF and the JAF with thresholds set to the values
given in Section II. NT = 1 corresponds to the special
case of the PDAF, and clearly the filters which retain
more than one mixture component perform better
than the PDAF. The JAF generally gives slightly
larger values of NAVE than the CAF, possibly due
to the settings of T and T1. For NT < 10, NAVE rises
approximately linearly with NT. In this region the
number of components in the mixture approximation
is usually determined by NT. For NT > 10, NAVE is
nearly constant, and in this region acceptable mixture
approximation (defined by T and T1) can usually be
achieved with less than NT components (see [4] for
more details). The performance of the filter using
the joining algorithm with T = 0 is also shown in
Fig. 7. With this threshold setting the algorithm never
reduces the number of mixture components below NT.
Even at NT = 30, this gives only a very small increase
in NAVE over the results from the joining algorithm
with the original threshold setting. Thus, for this
example, it appears that the thresholds T1 and T select
the minimum number of components for near optimal
performance.
Fig. 8 shows the average CPU time TAVE (again
from the 100 trials) for the filters to perform one
time step. The timescale is normalized to the average
CPU time for a single PDAF time step. For the two
filters with the original threshold settings, TAVE falls
rapidly to nearly constant values for NT > 10. The
initial high values of TAVE are due to time spent
reducing very large mixtures which result from
inadequate approximations at values of NT < 6 (see
[4]). Except for case NT = 6, the JAF was clearly
more time consuming than the CAF, and, as expected,
the execution times for the filters were in all cases
considerably greater than the PDAF. Also plotted in
Fig. 8 is the time taken by the JAF with T = 0. This
clearly shows the value of the acceptable modification
check in the reduction algorithms: for the small
improvement over the filter with the original threshold
settings, there is a large increase in computational
overheads. The extra processing time is required
672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 45, NO. 2 APRIL 2009
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 8. Average CPU time for single time step.
for the propagation of all NT components which are
always retained with T = 0.
C. Performance over the Problem Parameter Space
As already noted, the performance of the tracking
filters depends on only two parameters: q¢t4=r
and ½r. The primary aim here is to examine the
performance of the CAF and the PDAF as a function
of these two parameters. The CAF has been chosen
for this assessment in preference to the JAF, since in
the example of the previous section, the JAF almost
always required greater computation time, and the
performance of the filters was similar. Also in light
of the previous section, NT has been set to 20.
The average track survival time NAVE for the
CAF and the PDAF is shown as a function of ½r in
Figs. 9—13 for q¢t4=r = 10¡4, 10¡2, 1, 102, and 104,
respectively. As in the previous section, the initial
state vector was known perfectly, and the filters were
run until one of the track loss criteria was satisfied.
NAVE is the average of 100 Monte Carlo runs and 95%
confidence limits are shown as a vertical bar with
each point. Also shown is the average track lifetime
NL for a constant velocity prediction on the basis
of the perfectly known initial state vector. For this
prediction, measurements are ignored, so that NL is
independent of ½r. NL should provide a lower limit on
filter performance which may be approached as the
relative density ½r of clutter measurements becomes
large. Figs. 9—13 also show values of n1 which
is an alternative, but equivalent, to the parameter
½r. The parameter n1 is the expected number of
clutter measurements that would be passed by the
coarse acceptance test based on covariances from the
equivalent steady state Kalman filter. This parameter
may give a more meaningful measure of problem
difficulty.
The filters show similar performance trends in
each of Figs. 9—13. As would be expected, for given
q¢t4=r, track survival time increases as ½r and n1
decrease. Also the track survival time of the CAF
approaches that of the PDAF for both small and
large values of ½r. (This convergence for small ½r is
not shown in Figs. 9 and 10 as track survival time
is so long in these cases, that the computation time
for the simulation would be prohibitive.) Between
these extremes, the CAF outperforms the PDAF. The
average track lifetime of the CAF exceeds that of
the PDAF by a factor of 10 in some cases, although
an improvement factor between 3 and 5 is more
common. The region of the q¢t4=r, ½r space where
the CAF gives a significant improvement over the
PDAF is sketched in Fig. 14. Here the parameter
space is divided into three regions. For dense clutter
and a highly manoeuvrable target, the problem is so
adverse that neither the PDAF nor the CAF provide
any significant performance improvement over simple
prediction from the initial state vector. In other words
the measurements are of little use here. For sparse
clutter and a low level of target manoeuvre, the
performance of the PDAF is very similar to that of the
CAF. This implies that for this range of parameters,
both filters are nearly optimal. Between these two
regions, there is a significant range of parameters
where the CAF outperforms the PDAF. Figs. 9—14
are intended to provide a guide as to whether the
PDAF is adequate for this type of application, and if
SALMOND: MIXTURE REDUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR POINT AND EXTENDED OBJECT TRACKING IN CLUTTER 673
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 9. Average track lifetime for q¢t4=r = 10¡4.
Fig. 10. Average track lifetime for q¢t4=r = 10¡2.
not, whether the more complex CAF can provide the
necessary improvement.
As already stated, these results are for PD = 1. For
PD < 1 track lifetimes will be reduced, but further
study is required to determine the possible advantage
of a multiple component approximation relative to
the PDAF in this regime. Also note that although
consistency of the filters (i.e., compatibility of filter
internal covariance with achieved tracking errors) has
not been presented here, this has been confirmed for
sample cases in [4].
IV. BRIEF REVIEW OF IMPROVEMENTS BY OTHERS
Since the original conference publication [1],
several authors have pointed out shortcomings in the
original schemes and have suggested improvements.
These are mainly in terms of the choice of distance
measure and chiefly relate to the joining algorithm.
Williams and Maybeck [10, 11] have suggested
using the integrated squared difference (ISD) as an
indicator of the difference between two pdfs p1(x) and
p2(x). This is defined by R
(p1(x) ¡ p2(x))2dx. This
674 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 45, NO. 2 APRIL 2009
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 11. Average track lifetime for q¢t4=r = 1.
Fig. 12. Average track lifetime for q¢t4=r = 102.
has the great advantage that the ISD between two
Gaussian mixtures can be expressed in closed form.
Thus the cost of merging a pair of components can
be exactly quantified for the overall mixture (in terms
of the ISD). This avoids the rather ad hoc step in the
derivation of the joining algorithm from Lij to d2
ij of
(4). Also, as pointed out by Runnalls [12], because
d2
ij does not depend on the individual covariances of
components i and j, the joining algorithm will merge
a pair of components that have identical means but
very different covariances in preference to a pair
with incrementally separated means but identical
covariances. The ISD approach does not suffer from
this unfortunate characteristic and superior tracking
performance has been reported [10]. (Also see [13]
where the performance comparisons are made for
several different approaches to the standard tracking
in random clutter problem.) Maybeck and Smith [14]
have also applied ISD-based mixture reduction to
multiple model tracking. However, the ISD metric
is scale-dependent and it is computationally more
expensive to calculate than d2
ij .
SALMOND: MIXTURE REDUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR POINT AND EXTENDED OBJECT TRACKING IN CLUTTER 675
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 13. Average track lifetime for q¢t4=r = 104.
Fig. 14. Filter performance over problem parameter space.
Runnalls [12] has proposed an approach based
on the Kullback-Leibler discrimination measure.
The suggested metric is an upper bound on the
Kullback-Leibler discrimination of the mixture
after merging from the mixture before merging.
This provides a scale-independent measure and
good performance has been demonstrated for a
fairly high dimensional (15 dimensions) example
from a terrain-referenced navigation application.
The scheme has not yet been applied to a tracking
example.
In a development independent of the above and
of [1], Kan and Krogmeier [15] have derived a
cluster-based mixture reduction technique for tracking
in clutter. In this scheme, clustering is performed on
the predicted density prior to measurement update.
The method attempts to partition the mixture into
a specified number of clusters which minimise the
mean-squared difference between the estimates before
and after reduction. The partition is formed using a
coordinate descent algorithm (that does not guarantee
a global minimum). For the standard tracking in
676 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 45, NO. 2 APRIL 2009
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
clutter problem, improved performance over the
PDAF is demonstrated for a reduction to two clusters
at each time step.
Finally, it should be noted that mixture reduction
via pair-wise merging has also been addressed by
the statistics community (see for example Scott and
Szewczyk [16]). Also see Titterington et al. [17]
which includes a table of distance measures.
V. APPLICATION TO EXTENDED OBJECT TRACKING
A. Introduction
The mixture reduction algorithms described
in Section II have been applied to a range of
target tracking applications including multi-target,
multi-sensor problems Pao [18] and particle filter
regularization Gordon [19] (also see [20]). In this
section we describe an application to extended object
tracking which was originally presented in [3] with an
enhancement in [21].
In the standard target tracking problem, it is
assumed that only a single point measurement is
received from the target at each time step. However,
in many cases, high resolution sensors may be able
to resolve individual features or measurement sources
on an extended object. If these measurements can be
adequately interpreted, they may provide valuable
information on target behaviour, for example, body
orientation or a manoeuvre regime. However, the
problem can be highly challenging, particularly if the
structure (geometry of measurement sources) and the
association between received measurements and their
originating sources is uncertain. A related problem
is the tracking of a group of point targets moving in
formation.
B. General Problem Formulation
An extended multisource target may be represented
via a two-component model consisting of a body
or bulk component B and the measurement sources
si : i = 1,:::,NS. This scheme was proposed in
[22], [23] (also see Broida et al. [24, 25], Huang
and Netravali [26], Dezert [27], Blasch and Connare
[28], and Koch and Saul [29]). In this development,
B specifies a reference point (the “centroid”) on the
target and includes target orientation, velocity, and
possibly other terms. The vector si is the position
of measurement source i in target body axes, i.e.,
it is relative to the target centroid and the target
orientation. For this (formal) problem statement, it
will be assumed that the number NS of sources is
known. However, in practice, this may well not be
the case, although a fairly tight upper bound will often
be available. For a group tracking problem, the two
components correspond to the “bulk” motion of the
overall formation and the motion of individual targets
within the group.
1) Dynamics: The dynamics of the target are
assumed to obey a two-component linear-Gaussian
model of the form:
Bk+1 = ©0kBk + ¡0kw0k (6)
sik+1 = ©iksik + ¡ikwik for i = 1,:::,NS (7)
where the driving noise terms wik are independent,
zero mean, Gaussian random variables with known
covariances Qik. This formulation allows the
measurement sources to move relative to the target
body axes, although the motions of the individual
sources are independent of one another. If the sources
are fixed in body axes, the dynamics equations (7)
clearly collapse to sik+1 = sik. (Furthermore, the point
target problem of Section III is recovered if NS =1
and prior information places the source unequivocally
at the target centroid, i.e., s1k ´ 0.) For a group
tracking problem, the bulk component B represents
the centroid and dynamics of the target formation
and the si represents the individual targets within the
group. A joint state is defined as
XT
k =(BT
k , s
T
1k, s
T
2k,:::, s
T
NS k)
so the dynamics model may be written
Xk+1 = ©¤
kXk + ¡¤
k Wk (8)
where ©¤
k = diagf©0k,©1k,:::,©NS kg, ¡¤
k =
diagf¡0k,¡1k,:::,¡NS kg, and WT
k =(wT
0k,wT
1k,:::,wT
NS k).
The system noise Wk is therefore a zero mean,
Gaussian random process with covariance Q¤
k =
diagfQ0k,Q1k,:::,QNS kg. (An extension to a nonlinear
model would be straightforward.)
2) Measurements: At each time step k, a set Zk
of mk measurements is received from the sensor:
Zk = fzjk; j = 1,:::,mkg. Each of these measurements
may originate from one of the measurement sources
or it may be the result of random clutter. It is assumed
that a single measurement zjk cannot originate from
multiple sources, i.e., perfect sensor resolution is
assumed. If measurement zjk originates from source
sik, then the measurement equation may be written
zjk = h(sik,Bk)+ vjk (9)
where the measurement error vjk is a zero mean,
independent, Gaussian random variable of known
covariance Rk. Note that the measurement function
h, which is a function of Bk as well as sik, is the
same for all sources. It is assumed that a source
is detected (and so produces a measurement) with
known probability PD, and detection is independent
for each source and for each time step. Obscuration
of sources by the target body, possibly leading to
periods when certain sources are not visible, has
not been modelled in this present development. If a
measurement originates from clutter, it is assumed to
be an independent sample from a uniform distribution
SALMOND: MIXTURE REDUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR POINT AND EXTENDED OBJECT TRACKING IN CLUTTER 677
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
over the field of view (FOV) of the sensor: pC(z)=
1=V, where V is the volume of the FOV (which
comfortably encompasses the target). Furthermore,
the number NCk of clutter measurements is assumed to
have a Poisson distribution with mean ½V : PrfNCkg =
e¡½V(½V)
NCk=NCk!, where ½ is the spatial density of
clutter (assumed known).
3) Measurement-Source Association: The
(unknown) association between the received
measurements and the sources may be described by
a mapping ¸k from the set of measurement subscripts
to source subscripts:
¸k : f1,:::,mkg!f0,1,:::,NSg:
Here ¸k(j)= i implies that measurement zjk originates
from source sik if i> 0, and ¸k(j) = 0 implies that
measurement zjk is the result of a random clutter
process. Since it is assumed that a measurement can
originate from at most one source, f¸k(i)= ¸k(j) 6=0g
)fi = jg. It is convenient to define the set U(¸k)
of measurement subscripts corresponding to source
detections, i.e.,
U(¸k)= fu1,u2,:::,uND(¸k )g
= fj : ¸k(j) 6= 0, j = 1,:::,mkg (10)
where ND(¸k) is the number of measurement sources
detected under hypothesis ¸k.
4) Measurement Model given ¸: The measurement
equation depends on the association ¸k between
measurements and sources. We form a measurement
vector composed of the measurement detections under
¸k (which would be available in the case of labelled
measurements):
z¤
k(¸k)
T =(zT
u1k,zT
u2k,:::,zT
uND(¸k )k)
where the ui are given by (10). The corresponding
measurement function for this composite measurement
vector is
h¤
(Xk,¸k)
T =(h(s¸k (u1)k,Bk)
T,:::,h(s¸k (uND(¸k ))k,Bk)
T):
(11)
Thus the measurement model for the composite state
vector is
z¤
k(¸k)= h¤
(Xk,¸k)+ Vk (12)
where the measurement error vector VT
k =
(vT
1k,vT
2k,:::,vT
ND(¸k )k) is a zero mean Gaussian process
with covariance R¤
k (¸k) = diagfRk,:::,Rkg (ND(¸k)
times).
5) Prior Information: It is assumed that at
the initial time step, prior to the receipt of the first
measurement set Z1, the pdfs for the bulk and source
states are known Gaussians.
6) Requirement: Given the set of measurements
Z0
k and the prior pdf p(X1), the requirement is to
determine the posterior pdf p(Xk j Z0
k) via a recursive
filter, where Z0
k = fZ1,Z2,:::,Zkg.
C. Multiple Hypothesis EKF Algorithm
1) Prediction: Suppose that at time step k ¡ 1,
the posterior pdf of the state is given by the Gaussian
mixture with NEk¡1 components:
p(Xk¡1 j Z0
k¡1)=
N
XEk¡1
i=1
¯ik¡1N (Xk¡1;Xˆ
ik¡1,Pik¡1)
(13)
where ¯ik¡1 is the probability weight on component
i (so PNEk¡1
i=1 ¯ik¡1 = 1) and N (Xk¡1;Xˆ
ik¡1,Pik¡1) is a
Gaussian pdf with mean Xˆ
ik¡1 and covariance Pik¡1.
For the linear dynamics models of (8), the prior pdf
at the next time step may be obtained by applying the
Kalman prediction equations to each component:
p(Xk j Z0
k¡1)=
N
XEk¡1
i=1
¯ik¡1N (Xk;X¯
ik,Mik) (14)
where X¯
ik = ©¤
kXˆ
ik¡1 and Mik = ©¤
kPik¡1©¤T
k + ¡¤
k Q¤
k¡¤T
k ,
and the mixture weights are unchanged. For nonlinear
models, the prediction could be performed via the
EKF or UKF relations.
2) Update: An update procedure (in response
to a frame of measurements Zk) may be obtained by
applying Bayes rule to the Gaussian mixture prior
pdf and the (linearized) Gaussian likelihood from the
measurement model [4]. This results in each member
of the prior pdf splitting into NHk components, each
corresponding to a feasible association ¸k.(NHk is the
total number of feasible association hypotheses for NS
measurement sources and mk measurements: NHk = Pmin(NS ,mk )
ND=0 ¡
mk ND
¢
NS!=(NS ¡ ND)!.) The result is a
posterior mixture with NEk = NEk¡1NHk components.
Each member of the posterior mixture corresponds
to a prior component updated by measurements Zk
according to a hypothesis ¸k:
p(Xk j Zk,Z0
k¡1)=X
i
X
¸k
Prfi,¸k j Z0
kgp(Xk j i,¸k,Z0
k):
(15)
For an EKF approximation, each of these updated
components is Gaussian: the mixture component pdf
p(Xk j i,¸k,Z0
k) corresponding to prior component i and
current association hypotheses ¸k is given by
p(Xk j i,¸k,Z0
k)= N (Xk;Xˆ ¤
ik(¸k),P¤
ik (¸k))
update for given ¸k:
Xˆ ¤
ik(¸k)= X¯
ik + K¤
ik(¸k)º¤
ik(¸k)
P¤
ik (¸k)=[I ¡ K¤
ik(¸k)H¤
(X¯
i
,¸k)]Mik
678 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 45, NO. 2 APRIL 2009
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
where
º¤
ik(¸k)= z¤
k(¸k) ¡ h¤
(X¯
ik,¸k)
K¤
ik(¸k)= MikH¤
(X¯
ik,¸k)
TS¤
ik(¸k)
S¤
ik(¸k)= H¤
(X¯
ik,¸k)MikH¤
(X¯
ik,¸k)
T + R¤
k (¸k):
Here H¤(X¯
ik,¸k)= @h¤
(Xk,¸k)=@Xkj
X¯ ik is the Jacobian
of the measurement function h¤ of (11) with respect
to the bulk and source states. This may be written
(omitting the time and component subscripts) as the
block matrix
H¤
(X¯ ,¸)
T =(H¸(u1)(X¯ )
T,:::,H¸(uND(¸))(X¯ )
T)
where
H`(X¯ )= μ@h(s`,B)
@B , @h(s`,B)
@(s1, s2,:::, sNS )
¶¯
¯
¯
¯
X¯
:
So the update is effectively performed by a bank of
EKFs.
The mixture weights Prfi,¸k j Z0
kg of (15) are given
by (assuming PD < 1)
Prfi,¸k j Z0
kg/ ¯ik¡1
· PD
½(1 ¡ PD)
¸ND(¸k )
N (º¤
ik (¸k );0,S¤
ik (¸k ))
where N (º¤
ik(¸k);0,S¤
ik(¸k)) is the innovation likelihood
and the normalizing constant is obtained by summing
over all i and all ¸k.
Rewriting the double summation (15) as a single
summation over all possibilities indexed by a new
subscript i, the posterior pdf is given by
p(Xk j Z0
k)=X
NEk
i=1
¯ikN (Xk;Xˆ
ik,Pik) (16)
where the parameters ¯ik, Xˆ
ik and Pik are obtained
from the above equations according to a suitable
relabelling scheme. This is of the same form as
(13) and so one cycle of this recursive algorithm is
specified.
3) Hypothesis Construction and Mixture
Reduction: For any nontrivial problem, some
form of approximation to control the size of the
mixture is essential. As in Section III, this may
be achieved in two stages: rejection of any highly
improbable hypotheses before processing each frame
of measurements and approximation (reduction) of the
posterior mixture (16).
a) Hypothesis construction: In practice, this
first stage is achieved by construction rather than
rejection. Consider the prior pdf of the target state
as represented by the Gaussian mixture (14). Each
component of this mixture may be viewed as a
root from which new ¸ hypotheses may grow.
Hypotheses are constructed for each component
in turn. Component i defines a set of expected
measurement values in observation space: fh(s¯
jik, ¯
Bik):
j = 1,:::,NSg where s¯
jik and ¯
Bik are elements of the
prior mean X¯
ik. Ellipsoidal acceptance gates based on
the innovation covariance are defined about each of
these expected source locations. Each measurement
from the frame Zk is tested for membership of each
source acceptance gate under component i and so a
list of measurements that could have originated from
the source is produced. These lists are then used to
construct a set of feasible association hypotheses
using the rules that a measurement may originate from
at most one source, and a source may be the origin of
at most one measurement. This procedure is repeated
for each component of the prior mixture pdf.
b) Mixture reduction: Mixture reduction is
applied to the posterior mixture (16), i.e., after all
the hypotheses from the construction algorithm
have been processed. In this study, the clustering
algorithm described in Section II with NT = 20 has
been employed.
D. Illustrative Simulation Example
In this illustrative example, we consider an
extended target which consists of a linear array of
three measurement sources. The disposition of the
sources along the array is unknown, the only prior
information being that the location of each source is a
Gaussian pdf about the target centroid. Furthermore,
the sources may wander along the target during the
observation period, the probability of detection is less
than unity, and the measurements are corrupted by
random clutter. This challenging problem is specified
below [3].
1) Extended Target Problem Definition:
a) Bulk motion model: In this example the
bulk motion of the target (6) is represented by a
near constant velocity model in 3-D space with
B =(x,x_,y,y_, z, z_)
T, ©0 = diagf©C,©C,©Cg, ¡0 =
diagf¡C,¡C,¡Cg, w0 =(wX,wY,wZ)T,
©C =
μ1 ¢t
01 ¶
and ¡C =
μ¢t2=2
¢t ¶
:
Here the state vector B describes the position and
velocity of the centroid of the target with respect to
fixed axes. The acceleration process w0 is modelled
as zero mean, white Gaussian noise with covariance
E[w0wT
0 ]= Q0 = q0I3.
b) Source model: The target structure is modelled
as a straight, rigid “stick” with sources distributed
along its length. The target stick is aligned with the
velocity vector and it rotates about its centre point
(which we call the centroid). The position of source
i along the target axis from its centroid is specified by
the scalar sik, and the possible motion of each source
(7) along the axis is modelled by a random walk:
sik+1 = sik + ¢twik for i = 1,:::,NS
SALMOND: MIXTURE REDUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR POINT AND EXTENDED OBJECT TRACKING IN CLUTTER 679
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 15. Actual paths of target and observer (with line-of-sight vector at measurement times).
where wik is an independent Gaussian random variable
of zero mean and variance qS.
c) Source measurements: The line-of-sight vector
xLik from an observer at xobsk to source i is given by
(xLik,yLik, zLik)
T = xLik = xk + sik(x_
k=jx_
kj) ¡ xobsk:
(17)
Here the observer position xobsk is assumed to be
perfectly known, and the xk and x_
k are elements of Bk.
The range, azimuth, and elevation of this line-of-sight
vector relative to nonrotating axes are given by
rik =
q
x2
Lik + y2
Lik + z2
Lik
μik = tan¡1(yLik=xLik)
Ãik = tan¡1(zLik=
q
x2
Lik + y2
Lik):
(18)
Equations (17) and (18) define the measurement
function h(sik,Bk) of (9). Clearly this is a significantly
nonlinear function of the states. Thus, if a
measurement zjk originates from source i, it is given
by
zT
jk =(rik,μik,Ãik)+(vrjk,vμjk,vÃjk)
where the error vector is a zero mean, Gaussian
random vector of covariance Rk = diagf¾2
r ,¾2
μ ,¾2
Ãg.
2) Scenario and Measurement Generation:A
single pair of target and observer trajectories has
been simulated to demonstrate operation of the filter.
Both parties are both moving in three-dimensional
space and their paths are shown in Fig. 15. The target
path was generated by fitting a trajectory to a set
of way-points using splines to produce a credible,
smooth course (mismatched to the filter dynamics
model (8)) while the observer follows a constant
velocity trajectory.
The target measurement sources are distributed
along the target’s principal axis as assumed by the
filter. There are three sources nominally located at
¡5, +2, and +5 units relative to the target centroid.
(Note that in this case, the composite state vector
X has nine elements and the clustering algorithm is
applied to mixtures over this nine-dimensional space.)
The sources wander within §1 units about these
nominal locations along the target axis according to
a random walk. The sensor carried by the observer
detects each source with a probability of 0.8. If a
source is detected, the sensor produces measurements
of range, azimuth, and elevation; the angles being
680 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 45, NO. 2 APRIL 2009
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 16. Estimated positions of target body: forward extremity–open diamond, rear extremity–solid disc. Actual locations of target
centroid shown as circles. Note unequal axes.
relative to nonrotating axes. The measurements are
zero mean, Gaussian perturbations about the actual
source position with standard deviations of ¾r =
1 units, ¾μ = ¾Ã =1±. Random clutter is distributed
uniformly over the sensor’s observation region with a
density of about ½ = 10¡4 per unit per degree squared.
The sensor has perfect resolution but a finite FOV
(although this effect is not modelled within the filter).
The sensor data rate is 0.5 Hz.
The following filter parameters have been
employed:
Measurement errors and clutter density are
matched to the simulated data.
System noise for target centroid dynamics: pq0 =
0:05 units/s2
.
Random walk modelling possible source motion:
pqS =0:02 units/s.
Standard deviation (SD) of initial estimate of
centroid position and velocity: SD(x) = SD(y)=
SD(z) = 5 units and SD(x_) = SD(y_) = SD(z_)=
1 units/s. Filter supplied with initial estimates
generated from Gaussian distributions with these SDs
about the true initial position and velocity (x = y = z =
0 units and x_ = y_ =0:25, z_ = ¡0:02 units/s.)
Standard deviation of initial error in source
locations: SD(s11) = SD(s21) = SD(s31) = 5 units and
supplied initial estimate s¯
11 = s¯
21 = s¯
31 = 0, i.e., all at
the centroid. (As already stated, actual initial values
for source locations: s11 = ¡5, s21 = 2, s31 = 5.)
3) Simulation Results: Results are presented
for a particular data set and for a Monte Carlo
experiment. The filter output for a single simulation
run is illustrated via four figures.
a) Estimates of target body positions: Fig. 16
shows estimates of the target stick model in
X-Y-Z space. The stick estimate is drawn at each
measurement time. The forward extremity (i.e.,
estimated position of most forward source) is marked
by an open diamond and the rear extremity (i.e.,
estimated position of most rearward source) is
marked by a solid disc. These estimates are derived
from the mean of the most probable posterior
mixture component before reduction. Useful
estimates are obtained after the initial transient has
passed.
SALMOND: MIXTURE REDUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR POINT AND EXTENDED OBJECT TRACKING IN CLUTTER 681
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 17. Estimated ranges of measurement sources relative to actual range to centroid (continuous lines). Individual symbols show
measurements (missed measurements encompassed by a circle, wrongly associated clutter encompassed by a square). Most probable
association hypothesis before reduction shown by vertical links between measurements and source estimates.
b) Estimates of source locations: Fig. 17 shows
estimates of the three target source locations in
range coordinates and also shows the received range
measurements (including clutter). Range here is
relative to the actual range to the target centroid.
Again the estimates are derived from the mean of
the most probable association hypothesis (before
reduction) at each time step. The figure also shows the
association between the measurements and the source
estimates according to the most probable hypothesis.
(Unassociated source measurements are circled
and incorrectly associated clutter measurements
are encompassed by squares.) Note that, after an
initial period of uncertainty (due to an unfavourable
geometry and large track initialisation errors), the
most probable hypothesis provides a useful indication
of measurement origin. Fig. 18 shows estimates of
the target source locations in Cartesian coordinates.
Again, these estimates correspond to the most
probable hypothesis at each time step, and they are
shown relative to the actual target centroid.
c) Analysis of hypothesis management: An
analysis of hypotheses management is presented
in Fig. 19. The first trace shows the number of
hypotheses generated by the construction scheme and
the number of hypotheses remaining after reduction
by the clustering algorithm at each measurement
time. Note that after time step 7, by which time the
filter has established the disposition of sources, the
clustering algorithm always reduces the mixture to
less than 20 components. For about a third of the
measurement times, only one or two components
are retained. Also, after the first few time steps,
the number of hypotheses before reduction falls
substantially–except for the period between time
steps 33 and 39 which coincides with an increase
in the Y coordinate error for the post probable
hypothesis (see Fig. 18). The other traces in Fig. 19
show the probabilities of the five most probable
hypotheses before and after reduction.
d) Monte Carlo experiment: To provide a
statistically meaningful performance indication for
this highly challenging example, a Monte Carlo
experiment with 100 replications has been performed.
For each replication, the target and observer paths
of Fig. 15 were retained: only the measurement
errors, source detections and initial estimate of the
bulk state were varied between runs according to
the statistics specified in Section VD2. Multiple
hypothesis EKFs with three different mixture
reduction or approximation strategies were applied
to the measurement data sets: the clustering algorithm
with NT = 20, with NT = 1, and simple selection of the
most probable posterior hypothesis. This last option is
a “hard decision” strategy that takes no account of the
possibility of an incorrect selection (the covariance
of the most probable component is not modified).
The clustering algorithm with NT = 1 is equivalent
682 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 45, NO. 2 APRIL 2009
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 18. Estimated positions of measurement sources relative to actual target centroid in Cartesian coordinates.
Fig. 19. Analysis of hypothesis management by clustering algorithm.
SALMOND: MIXTURE REDUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR POINT AND EXTENDED OBJECT TRACKING IN CLUTTER 683
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 20. Monte Carlo results.
to the joint probabilistic data association (JPDA)
approximation [2].
The top plot of Fig. 20 shows the cumulative
distribution of the position error (Euclidean distance)
at the final time step, up to an error of 10 units.
To achieve a small error at this point, the filter
must successfully initiate the track (including
learning the disposition of sources with only vague
prior information) and maintain track through the
observation period. The advantage of retaining
multiple mixture components is evident from Fig. 20,
for example, it can be seen that the median of the
final position error is about 3 units for the CAF with
NT = 20 and about 7.5 units for the JPDA. Also
note that for this stressing example, the strategy
of retaining only the most probably component
performs very poorly compared with the JPDA.
The second plot in Fig. 20 shows the final errors
with NT = 20 and NT = 1 (JPDA) for each individual
replication; this is a valid comparison as all filters
were applied to the same data set at each replication.
In about 90% of cases the multiple component
filter gives a smaller error, and when the JPDA
is better, the difference is usually small (note the
logarithmic scale). The final error exceeds 20 units
for about 30% of JPDA cases. In only two cases
does the final error of the CAF with NT = 20 exceed
20 units.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have reviewed two mixture
reduction methods (known as the joining algorithm
and the clustering algorithm) originally proposed
in [1]. These algorithms have been used to manage
the proliferation of hypotheses that results from
target tracking with measurement association
uncertainty. For the standard problem of tracking
a point target in uniform random clutter, these
schemes give a substantial performance improvement
over single-component methods such as the PDAF
for a significant range of problem parameters.
This improvement is at the expense of increased
computational memory and processing requirements.
The processing time for a filter using the clustering
algorithm is usually within an order of magnitude of
the PDAF processing time, although for very difficult
cases, where performance is in any case poor, the
excess may be several orders of magnitude.
Recently other authors [10—12] have pointed
out some shortcomings in these schemes and
have proposed improvements resulting in reported
improvement in tracking performance.
In the second part of this paper, mixture reduction
via the clustering algorithm has been used to manage
the growth of hypotheses for an extended object
tracking problem. This shows that the methods can be
successfully applied to moderately high dimensional
examples without modification.
684 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 45, NO. 2 APRIL 2009
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Initial development of the mixture reduction
algorithms was carried out with Derek Atherton
and John Bather of the University of Sussex, and
with Roger Hollingworth of the Royal Aerospace
Establishment Farnborough. The work on extended
object tracking was carried out mainly at QinetiQ. The
author would like to acknowledge valuable discussions
with Neil Gordon of DSTO Australia, and with Kevin
Gilholm, Graham Pulford, and Nick Everett (all of
QinetiQ Farnborough). These studies were sponsored
by various UK MOD programmes.
REFERENCES
[1] Salmond, D.
Mixture reduction algorithms for target tracking in clutter.
SPIE: Signal and Data Processing of Small Targets,
vol. 1305, 1990, 434—445.
[2] Bar-Shalom, Y., and Fortmann, T.
Tracking and Data Association.
San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1988.
[3] Gilholm, K., and Salmond, D.
Extended object and group tracking.
In RTO SET Symposium on Target Tracking and
Sensor Data Fusion for Military Observation Systems,
vol. RTO-MP-SET-059, Budapest, Hungary, NATO, Oct.
2003, 10.1—10.15.
[4] Salmond, D.
Tracking in Uncertain Environments.
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Sussex and Royal
Aerospace Establishment Technical Memorandum AW
121, 1989.
[5] Alspach, D.
A Gaussian sum approach to the multi-target
identification-tracking problem.
Automatica, 11 (May 1975), 285—296.
[6] Lainiotis, D., and Park, S.
On joint detection, estimation and system identification:
Discrete data case.
International Journal of Control, 17 (1973).
[7] Singer, R., Sea, R., and Housewright, K.
Derivation and evaluation of improved tracking filters for
use in dense multi-target environments.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-20 (July
1974), 423—432.
[8] Bar-Shalom, Y., and Birmiwal, K.
Consistency and robustness of the PDAF for target
tracking in cluttered environments.
Automatica, 19 (July 1983), 431—437.
[9] Blackman, S., and Popoli, R.
Design and Analysis of Modern Tracking Systems.
Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1999.
[10] Williams, J., and Maybeck, P.
Cost-function-based hypothesis control techniques for
multiple hypothesis tracking.
Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 43 (2006),
976—989.
[11] Williams, J., and Maybeck, P.
Cost-function-based Gaussian mixture reduction for target
tracking.
In Fusion 2003: Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Information Fusion, 2003, 1047—1054.
[12] Runnalls, A.
A Kullback-Leibler approach to Gaussian mixture
reduction.
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic
Systems, 43 (July 2007), 989—999.
[13] Pao, L., and Powers, R.
A comparison of several different approaches for target
tracking with clutter.
In Proceedings of the American Control Conference, 2003,
3919—3924.
[14] Maybeck, P., and Smith, B.
Multiple model tracker based on Gaussian mixture
reduction for maneuvering targets in clutter.
In Fusion 2005: Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Information Fusion, 2005.
[15] Kan, W., and Krogmeier, J.
A generalization of the PDA target tracking algorithm
using hypothesis clustering.
In Proceedings of 13th Asilomar Conference on Signals,
Systems and Computers, Nov. 1996.
[16] Scott, D., and Szewczyk, W.
From kernels to mixtures.
Technometrics, 43 (Aug. 2001), 323—335.
[17] Titterington, D., Smith, A., and Makov, U.
Statistical Analysis of Finite Mixture Distributions.
New York: Wiley, 1985.
[18] Pao, L.
Multisensor multitarget mixture reduction algorithms for
target tracking.
AIAA Journal of Guidance, Control and Dynamics, 17
(1994), 1205—1211.
[19] Gordon, N.
A hybrid Bootstrap filter for target tracking in clutter.
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic
Systems, 33 (Jan. 1997), 353—358.
[20] Pulford, G.
Taxonomy of multiple target tracking methods.
IEE Proceedings on Radar, Sonar and Navigation, 152,5
(2005), 291—304.
[21] Pulford, G., and Salmond, D.
A Gaussian mixture filter for near-far object tracking.
In Fusion 2005: Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Information Fusion, 2005, 337—344.
[22] Gordon, N., Salmond, D., and Fisher, D.
Bayesian target tracking after group pattern distortion.
SPIE: Signal and Data Processing of Small Targets,
vol. 3163, 1997, 238—248.
[23] Salmond, D., and Gordon, N.
Group and extended object tracking.
SPIE: Signal and Data Processing of Small Targets,
vol. 3809, 1999, 284—296.
[24] Broida, T., Chandrashekhar, S., and Chellappa, R.
Recursive 3-D motion estimation from a monocular
image sequence.
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic
Systems, 26, 4 (1990), 639—656.
[25] Broida, T., and Chellappa, R.
Estimating the kinematics and structure of a rigid object
from a sequence of monocular images.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 13, 6 (1991), 497—513.
[26] Huang, T., and Netravali, A.
Motion and structure from feature correspondences: A
review.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 82, 2 (1994), 252—268.
SALMOND: MIXTURE REDUCTION ALGORITHMS FOR POINT AND EXTENDED OBJECT TRACKING IN CLUTTER 685
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
[27] Dezert, J.
Tracking manoeuvring and bending extended target in
cluttered environment.
SPIE: Signal and Data Processing of Small Targets,
vol. 3373, 1998, 283—294.
[28] Blasch, E., and Connare, T.
Improving track maintenance through group tracking.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Estimation, Tracking
and Fusion, Monterey, CA, 2001, 360—371.
David Salmond has a D.Phil. in “Tracking in Uncertain Environments,”
University of Sussex, 1989.
He is a Fellow at the UK MOD Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Farnborough. He has worked in target tracking and missile guidance for over
30 years (formally at the Royal Aircraft Establishment, the Defence Evaluation
and Research Agency and QinetiQ). His research interests are mainly in the
application of Bayesian methods to tracking and guidance, especially for
uncertain systems, measurement association uncertainty, data fusion and target
selection/acquisition.
Dr. Salmond is an Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and
Electronic Systems and a Fellow of the IET.
[29] Koch, W., and Saul, R.
A Bayesian approach to extended object tracking and
tracking of loosely structured target groups.
In Fusion 2005: Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Information Fusion, 2005.
686 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 45, NO. 2 APRIL 2009
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on June 12,2026 at 02:05:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 